=======
 PRoot
=======

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
``chroot``, ``mount --bind``, and ``binfmt_misc`` without privilege/setup
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

:Date: 2012-03-23
:Version: 1.8.3
:Manual section: 1


Synopsis
========

**proot** [*option*] ... */path/to/guest/rootfs* [*program* [*arg*] ...]


Description
===========

PRoot is a user-space implementation of ``chroot``, ``mount --bind``,
and ``binfmt_misc``.  This means that users don't need any privilege
or setup to do things like: using an arbitrary directory as the new
root file-system or making files accessible somewhere else in the
file-system hierarchy or executing programs built for another CPU
architecture transparently through QEMU.  Technically PRoot relies on
``ptrace``, an unprivileged system-call available in every Linux
kernel.

The new root file-system, a.k.a *guest rootfs*, typically contains a
Linux distribution.  By default PRoot confines the execution of
programs to the guest rootfs only, however users can use the built-in
*mount/bind* mechanism to access files and directories from the actual
root file-system, a.k.a *host rootfs*, just as if they were part of
the guest rootfs.

When the guest Linux distribution is made for a CPU architecture
incompatible with the host one, PRoot uses the CPU emulator QEMU to
execute transparently guest programs.  It's a convenient way to
develop, to build, and to validate any guest Linux packages seamlessly
on users' computer, just as if they were in a *native* guest
environment.  That way all of the cross-compilation issues are
avoided.

PRoot can also *mix* the execution of host programs and the execution
of guest programs emulated by QEMU.  This is useful to use host
equivalents of programs that are missing from the guest rootfs and to
speed up build-time by using cross-compilation tools or
CPU-independent programs, like interpreters.

It is worth noting that the guest kernel is never involved, regardless
of whether QEMU is used or not.  Technically, when guest programs
perform access to system resources, PRoot translates their requests
before sending them to the host kernel.  This means that guest
programs can use host resources (devices, network, ...) just as if
they were "normal" host programs.


Options
=======

The command-line interface is composed of three *ordered* parts:
PRoot's options (optional), path to the guest rootfs (mandatory), and
the command to launch (``/bin/sh`` by default).

This section describes the options supported by PRoot, that is, the
first part of its command-line interface.


Regular options
---------------

-b path, --bind=path, -m path, --mount=path
    Make the content of *path* accessible in the guest rootfs.

    This option makes any file or directory of the host rootfs
    accessible in the confined environment just as if it were part of
    the guest rootfs.  By default the host path is bound to the same
    path in the guest rootfs but users can specify any other location
    with the syntax: ``-b *host_path*:*guest_location*``. Such
    bindings are said "asymmetric".

-q command, --qemu=command
    Execute guest programs through QEMU as specified by *command*.

    Each time a guest program is going to be executed, PRoot inserts
    the QEMU *command* in front of the initial request.  That way,
    guest programs actually run on a virtual guest CPU emulated by
    QEMU.  The native execution of host programs is still effective
    and the whole host rootfs is bound to ``/host-rootfs`` in the
    guest environment.

    This option is automatically enabled by the option ``-Q``.

-w path, --pwd=path, --cwd=path
    Set the initial working directory to *path*, default is ``/``.

    Some programs expect to be launched from a given directory but do
    not perform any ``chdir`` by themselves, the most common example
    is ``./configure`` scripts.  This option avoids the need for
    running a shell and then entering the directory manually.

    See option ``-W``.

-u, --allow-unknown-syscalls
    Allow the execution of unknown syscalls.

    PRoot has to know the semantics of a syscall to translate its
    arguments. This is why any syscall that PRoot isn't aware of is
    blocked.  This option disables this default behavior.

-k string, --kernel-release=string
    Force syscall ``uname`` to report *string* as kernel release.

    Technically the GNU C library relies on syscalls provided by the
    kernel that's why it performs a sanity check at each program
    start-up to verify whether the current kernel is known to be
    compatible.  If users are running a GNU C library that expects a
    kernel more recent than the one used on their computers, they will
    get the error "FATAL: kernel too old".  This option allows users
    to cheat this sanity check by faking the release number of the
    current kernel.  This option should be used with care since it
    does not improve the compatibility.

-0, --root-id
    Force syscalls ``chown*`` and ``get*id`` to return 0, aka "root".

    Some programs will refuse to work if they are not run with "root"
    privileges, even if there is no technical reason for that.  This
    is typically the case with package managers.  This option allows
    users to bypass this kind of limitation by faking the user/group
    identity, and by faking the success of any ownership change.  Note
    that this option is quite limited compared to ``fakeroot``.

-v, --verbose
    Increase the level of debug information.

-V, --version, --about
    Print version, copyright, license and contact, then exit.

-h, --help, --usage
    Print the version and the command-line usage, then exit.


Alias options
-------------

The following options are aliases for handy sets of options.

-B, -M
    Alias: ``-b`` for each path of a recommended list

    There are a couple of bindings that are needed for most guest
    programs to behave correctly regarding the configuration part of
    the host computer which is not specific to the host Linux
    distribution, such as: user/group information, network setup,
    run-time information, users' files, ... This highly recommended
    option enables the following bindings:

    * /etc/host.conf
    * /etc/hosts
    * /etc/hosts.equiv
    * /etc/mtab
    * /etc/netgroup
    * /etc/networks
    * /etc/passwd
    * /etc/group
    * /etc/nsswitch.conf
    * /etc/resolv.conf
    * /etc/localtime
    * /dev/
    * /sys/
    * /proc/
    * /tmp/
    * $HOME

-Q command
    Alias: ``-q *command* -B``

    This option is highly recommended when using QEMU; it enables all
    the recommended bindings.

-W
    Alias: ``-b . -w .``

    Make the current working directory accessible in the guest rootfs
    and then use it as the initial working directory.  This option is
    typically useful to launch ``./configure`` scripts directly, for
    instance.


Exit Status
===========

If an internal error occurs, ``proot`` returns a non-zero exit status,
otherwise it returns the exit status of the last terminated
program. When an error has occurred, the only way to know if it comes
from the last terminated program or from ``proot`` itself is to have a
look at the error message.


Files
=====

PRoot reads links in ``/proc/<pid>/fd/`` to support `openat(2)`-like
syscalls made by the guest programs.


Examples
========

In the following examples the directories ``/mnt/slackware-8.0`` and
``/mnt/armslack-12.2/`` contain a Linux distribution respectively made
for x86 CPUs and ARM CPUs.


``chroot`` equivalent
---------------------

To execute a command inside a given Linux distribution, just give
``proot`` the path to the guest rootfs followed by the desired command.
The example below executes the program ``cat`` to print the content of
a file::

    proot /mnt/slackware-8.0/ cat /etc/motd
    
    Welcome to Slackware Linux 8.0

The default command is ``/bin/sh`` when none is specified. Thus the
shortest way to confine an interactive shell and all its sub-programs
is::

    proot /mnt/slackware-8.0/
    
    $ cat /etc/motd
    Welcome to Slackware Linux 8.0


``mount --bind`` equivalent
---------------------------

The option ``-b``, short for ``--bind``, makes any file from the host
rootfs accessible in the confined environment just as if it were
initially part of the guest rootfs.  It is sometimes required to run
programs that rely on some specific files::

    proot /mnt/slackware-8.0/
    
    $ ps -o tty,command
    Error, do this: mount -t proc none /proc

Works better with::

    proot -b /proc /mnt/slackware-8.0/
    
    $ ps -o tty,command
    TT       COMMAND
    ?        -bash
    ?        proot -b /proc /mnt/slackware-8.0/
    ?        /lib/ld-linux.so.2 /bin/sh
    ?        /lib/ld-linux.so.2 /usr/bin/ps -o tty,command

Actually there's a bunch of such specific files, that's why PRoot
provides the option ``-B`` to bind automatically a pre-defined list of
recommended paths::

    proot -B /mnt/slackware-8.0/
    
    $ ps -o tty,command
    TT       COMMAND
    pts/6    -bash
    pts/6    proot -B /mnt/slackware-8.0/
    pts/6    /lib/ld-linux.so.2 /bin/sh
    pts/6    /lib/ld-linux.so.2 /usr/bin/ps -o tty,command

The bind mechanism can also be used to relocate files and directories
in the host rootfs by using ``/`` as the path to the guest rootfs and
by specifying an alternate binding location (separated by ``:``).  It
is quite handy to cheat programs that perform access to hard-coded
locations, like some installation scripts::

    proot -b /tmp/alternate_usr:/usr /
    
    $ cd to/sources
    $ make install
    [...]
    install -m 755 prog "/usr/bin"
    [...] # prog was installed in "/tmp/alternate_usr/bin" actually

It can also be used to substitute system configuration files, for
example the DNS setting::

    proot -b ./alternate_resolv.conf:/etc/resolv.conf / resolveip google.com


``binfmt_misc`` equivalent
--------------------------

PRoot uses QEMU to execute programs built for a CPU architecture
incompatible with the host one.  From users' point-of-view, guest
programs handled by QEMU are executed transparently, that is, just
like host programs.  To enable this feature users just have to specify
which instance of QEMU they want to use with the option ``-q`` or
``-Q`` (this latter implies ``-B``)::

    proot -Q qemu-arm /mnt/armslack-12.2/
    
    $ cat /etc/motd
    Welcome to ARMedSlack Linux 12.2

The parameter of the ``-q/-Q`` option is actually a whole QEMU
command, for instance to enable its GDB server on port 1234::

    proot -Q "qemu-arm -g 1234" /mnt/armslack-12.2/ emacs

PRoot allows to mix transparently the emulated execution of guest
programs and the native execution of host programs in the same
file-system namespace.  It's typically useful to extend the list of
available programs and to speed up build-time significantly.  This
mixed-execution feature is enabled by default when using QEMU, and the
content of the host rootfs is made accessible through
``/host-rootfs``::

    proot -Q qemu-arm /mnt/armslack-12.2/
    
    $ file /bin/echo
    [...] ELF 32-bit LSB executable, ARM [...]
    $ /bin/echo 'Hello world!'
    Hello world!

    $ file /host-rootfs/bin/echo
    [...] ELF 64-bit LSB executable, x86-64 [...]
    $ /host-rootfs/bin/echo 'Hello mixed world!'
    Hello mixed world!

Since both host and guest programs use the guest rootfs as ``/``,
users may want to deactivate explicitly cross-filesystem support found
in most GNU cross-compilation tools.  For example with GCC configured
to cross-compile to the ARM target::

    proot -Q qemu-arm /mnt/armslack-12.2/
    
    $ export CC=/host-rootfs/opt/cross-tools/arm-linux/bin/gcc
    $ export CFLAGS="--sysroot=/"   # could be optional indeed
    $ ./configure; make

As with regular files, a host instance of a program can be bound over
its guest instance.  Here is an example where the guest binary of
``make`` is overlaid by the host one::

   proot -Q qemu-arm -b /usr/bin/make /mnt/armslack-12.2/
   
   $ which make
   /usr/bin/make
   $ make --version # overlaid
   GNU Make 3.82
   Built for x86_64-slackware-linux-gnu

It's worth mentioning that even when mixing the native execution of
host programs and the emulated execution of guest programs, they still
believe they are running in a native guest environment.  As a
demonstration, here is a partial output of a typical ``./configure``
script::

    checking whether the C compiler is a cross-compiler... no


See Also
========

chroot(1), mount(8), binfmt_misc, ptrace(2), qemu(1), sb2(1),
bindfs(1), fakeroot(1), fakechroot(1)


Colophon
========

Visit http://proot.me for help, bug reports, suggestions, patchs, ...
Copyright (C) 2010, 2011, 2012 STMicroelectronics, licensed under GPL v2 or later.
